adding scripted metric aggs docs (#10211)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _aggregations/metric/scripted-metric.md

# Scripted metric aggregations

> The `scripted_metric` aggregation is a multi-value metric aggregation that returns metrics calculated from a specified script. A script has four stages: `init`, `map`, `combine`, and `reduce`, which are run in order by each aggregation, and allow you to combine results from your documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `scripted_metric` aggregation is a multi-value metric aggregation that returns metrics calculated from a specified script. A script has four phases, `init`, `map`, `combine`, and `reduce`, which are run in order by each aggregation and allow you to combine results from your documents.
```

> The `scripted_metric` aggregation is a multi-value metric aggregation that returns metrics calculated from a specified script. The aggregation goes through up to four script stages during execution. These stages run in order and allow you to accumulate and combine results from your documents.

Reviewer 2: `The aggregation goes through up to four script stages during execution. These stages run in order and allow you to accumulate and combine results from your documents.`

I find this wording confusing - this wording seems to imply that upto 4 independent scripts can run at max. 

Something like this might be clear: `A script has four stages: <name the stages>, which are run in order by each aggregation, and allow you to combine results from your documents.`

## Parameters

The `scripted_metric` aggregation takes the following parameters.

| Parameter        | Data type | Required/Optional | Description                                                                                        |
| ---------------- | --------- | ----------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `init_script`    | String    | Optional          | A script that executes once per shard before any documents are processed. Used to set up an initial `state` (for example, initialize counters or lists in a `state` object). If not provided, the `state` starts as an empty object on each shard.       |
| `map_script`     | String    | Required          | A script that executes for each document collected by the aggregation. This script updates the `state` based on the document's data. For example, you might check the field's value and then increment a counter or calculate a running sum in the `state`.                                                  |

> | `combine_script` | String    | Required          | A script that executes once per shard after all documents on that shard have been processed by the `map_script`. This script aggregates the shard's `state` into a single result to be sent back to the coordinating node. This script is used to finalize the computation for one shard (for example, summing up counters or totals stored in the state). The script should return the consolidated value or structure for its shard.  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `combine_script` | String    | Required          | A script that executes once per shard after all documents on that shard have been processed by the `map_script`. This script aggregates the shard's `state` into a single result to be sent back to the coordinating node. This script is used to finalize the computation for one shard (for example, summing up counters or totals stored in the `state`). The script should return the consolidated value or structure for its shard.  |
```

| `reduce_script`  | String    | Required          | The script executes once on the coordinating node after receiving combined results from all shards. This script receives a special variable states, which is an array containing each shard’s output from the combine script. The `reduce_script` iterates over states and produces the final aggregation output. For example, summing shard sums, or merging maps of counts. The value returned by the reduce script will be the value reported in the aggregation results. |
| `params`         | Object    | Optional          | User-defined parameters accessible from all scripts except `reduce_script`.                        |

## Allowed return types

Scripts can use any valid operations and objects internally, however the data you store in `state`, or return from any script, must be of permitted types. This restriction exists because the intermediate state needs to be sent between nodes. The allowed types are:

- Primitive types: `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`, `boolean`
- String

> - Map (with keys and values only of allowed types)

Reviewer 2: `Map (with keys and values only of allowed types)` : What allowed types? String & Primitives defined above?

> - Array (containing only allowed types)

Reviewer 2: `Map (with keys and values only of allowed types)` : What allowed types? String & Primitives defined above?

## Using parameters in scripts

You can optionally pass custom parameters to your scripts using the `params` field. This is a user-defined object whose contents become variables available in your `init_script`, `map_script`, and `combine_script`. The `reduce_script` does not directly receive `params`, because by the `reduce` phase you all needed data should be in the `states` array. If you need a constant in the `reduce` phase, you can include it as part of each shard’s state or use a stored script. All parameters must be defined inside the global `params` object, this ensures that they are shared across the different script stages. If you do not specify any `params`, it will default to an empty object. 

For example, you can supply a `threshold` or `field` name via `params` and reference `params.threshold` or `params.field` inside your scripts, see following example:

```json
"scripted_metric": {
  "params": {
    "threshold": 100,
    "field": "amount"
  },
  "init_script": "...",
  "map_script": "...",
  "combine_script": "...",
  "reduce_script": "..."
}
```

## Example

> The following are examples

Reviewer 2: nit: missing colon at end of sentence?

Create an index:

```json
PUT transactions
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "type":   { "type": "keyword" }, 
      "amount": { "type": "double" }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Index four transactions, two sales (amounts `80` and `130`) and two costs (`10` and `30`):

```json
PUT transactions/_bulk?refresh=true
{ "index": {} }
{ "type": "sale", "amount": 80 }
{ "index": {} }
{ "type": "cost", "amount": 10 }
{ "index": {} }
{ "type": "cost", "amount": 30 }
{ "index": {} }
{ "type": "sale", "amount": 130 }
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

In order to run a search with a scripted metric aggregation to calculate the profit, use the following scripts:

- The `init_script` sets up an empty list to hold transaction values for each shard. 
- The `map_script` for each document adds the document’s amount to the `state.transactions` list, as a positive value if type is `sale`, or as a negative value if type is `cost`. By the end of the `map` phase, each shard’s `state.transactions` will contain a list of numbers representing the income and expenses on that shard. 

> - The `combine_script` takes that list and sums it up to produce the shard’s total profit and returns that number. 

Reviewer 2: ~that list~ ->  mention the list name received from above

~that number~ -> mention the object name which will be passed onto reduce stage next

> - The `combine_script` processes the `state.transactions` list and computes a single `shardProfit` value for the shard. This `shardProfit` number is then returned as the shard's output. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The `combine_script` processes the `state.transactions` list and computes a single `shardProfit` value for the shard. The `shardProfit` is then returned as the shard's output. 
```

> - The `reduce_script` runs on the coordinating node, receiving the array `states`, which holds the `shardProfit` value from each shard. It checks for null entries and sums these values to compute the overall profit, and returns the final result.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The `reduce_script` runs on the coordinating node, receiving the `states` array, which holds the `shardProfit` value from each shard. It checks for null entries, adds together these values to compute the overall profit, and returns the final result.
```

> See following example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following request contains all described scripts:
```

```json
GET transactions/_search
{
  "size": 0, 
  "aggs": {
    "total_profit": {
      "scripted_metric": {
        "init_script": "state.transactions = []",
        "map_script": "state.transactions.add(doc['type'].value == 'sale' ? doc['amount'].value : -1 * doc['amount'].value)",
        "combine_script": "double shardProfit = 0; for (t in state.transactions) { shardProfit += t; } return shardProfit;",
        "reduce_script": "double totalProfit = 0; for (p in states) { if (p != null) { totalProfit += p; }} return totalProfit;"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> Example response

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> The response returns the `total_profit` as `170`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The response returns the `total_profit`:
```

```json
PUT logs
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "response": { "type": "keyword" }
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Add sample documents with a variety of response codes:

```json
PUT logs/_bulk?refresh=true
{ "index": {} }
{ "response": "200" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "response": "201" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "response": "404" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "response": "500" }
{ "index": {} }
{ "response": "304" }
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

The `state` (on each shard) is a map with three counters: `error`, `success`, and `other`. 

To run a scripted metric aggregation which counts the categories, use the following scripts:

- The `init_script` initializes counters for `error`, `success`, and `other` to `0`. 
- The `map_script` examines each document’s response code and increments the relevant counter based on the response code. 
- The `combine_script` returns the `state.responses` map for that shard.
- The `reduce_script` takes the array of maps (`states`) from all shards and merges them. Thus, it creates a new combined map and adds the `error`, `success`, and `other` counts from each shard’s map. This combined map is returned as the final result.

> 

Reviewer: Line 187: Please confirm that my change to the first sentence retains the intended meaning.

```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> The response returns three values in the `value` object, demonstrating how a scripted metric can return multiple metrics at once by using a map in the state:

Reviewer: "scripted metric" => "`scripted_metric` aggregration"? Should "state" be in code font?

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 5,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": null,
    "hits": []
  },
  "aggregations": {
    "responses_by_type": {
      "value": {
        "other": 1,
        "success": 2,
        "error": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> ## Handling empty buckets (no documents scenario)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Managing empty buckets (no documents)
```

> When using a `scripted_metric` aggregation as a subaggregation within a bucket aggregation (such as `terms`), it is important to account for buckets that contain no documents on certain shards. In such cases, those shards return a `null` value for the aggregation state. During the `reduce_script` phase, the `states` array may therefore include `null` entries corresponding to these shards. To ensure reliable execution, the `reduce_script` must be designed to handle `null` values gracefully. A common approach is to include a conditional check, such as `if (state != null)`, before accessing or operating on each state. Failure to implement such checks can result in runtime errors when processing empty buckets across shards.

Reviewer: End of 2nd sentence: Should "state" be in code font?

## Performance considerations

> Because scripted metrics run custom code for every document and possibly accumulate large in-memory state, they can be slower than built-in aggregations. The intermediate state from each shard has to be serialized to send it to the coordinating node. Therefore if your `state` is very large, it can consume a lot of memory and network bandwidth. To keep your searches efficient, make your scripts as lightweight as possible and avoid accumulating unnecessary data in the `state`. Use the combine stage to shrink state data before sending, as demonstrated in [Calculating net profit from transactions](#calculating-net-profit-from-transactions), and only collect the values that you truly need to produce the final metric.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because scripted metrics run custom code for every document and therefore potentially accumulate a large in-memory state, they can be slower than built-in aggregations. The intermediate state from each shard must be serialized in order to send it to the coordinating node. Therefore if your `state` is very large, it can consume a lot of memory and network bandwidth. To keep your searches efficient, make your scripts as lightweight as possible and avoid accumulating unnecessary data in the `state`. Use the combine stage to shrink state data before sending, as demonstrated in [Calculating net profit from transactions](#calculating-net-profit-from-transactions), and only collect the values that you truly need to produce the final metric.
```

> 

Reviewer: Line 267: This paragraph contains both "state" and `state`. Should they all be `state`? Also, in the last sentence, should `combine` be in code font (it is above)?

Author: @natebower I've updated all states to `state` and same for `map`, this one is difficult to gauge, can you have another look through this to make sure it all makes sense?

```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

Example response

The response returns three values together under the `value` object. This demonstrates how a scripted metric can return multiple metrics at once by using a map in the state:

```json
{
  ...
  "hits": {
    "total": {
      "value": 5,
      "relation": "eq"
    },
    "max_score": null,
    "hits": []
  },
  "aggregations": {
    "responses_by_type": {
      "value": {
        "other": 1,
        "success": 2,
        "error": 2
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Handling empty buckets (no documents scenario)

> When using a `scripted_metric` aggregation as a sub-aggregation within a bucket aggregation (such as terms), it is important to account for buckets that contain no documents on certain shards. In such cases, those shards return a `null` value for the aggregation state. During the `reduce_script` phase, the states array may therefore include `null` entries corresponding to these shards. To ensure reliable execution, the `reduce_script` must be designed to handle `null` values gracefully. A common approach is to include a conditional check, such as `if (state != null)`, before accessing or operating on each state. Failure to implement such checks can result in runtime errors when processing empty buckets across shards.

Reviewer 2: Not related to this documentation - but do you think that handling null can be another improvement in code base by passing some paramater like `ignore_null_results`.

I'm wondering that might even make scripted aggs faster if the null checks are part of code-flow via some param rather than run as part of script.
